now Egypt is proposing a new ceasefire
between Israel and Hamas in Gaza that
would be implemented in three stages
it's been widely reported indirect
negotiations would be held in Egypt with
mediation by Qatar and the US the first
phase would see a humanitarian pause of
7 to 10 days Hamas would release all
civilian captives in exchange for
Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails
in the second phase Hamas would free all
female soldiers over another 7 days as
well as releasing bodies it still holds
of Israelis killed since October the 7th
all the remaining captives would be
released during another month-long
ceasefire while Israel would free more
Palestinian inmates under the proposal
Israel would also withdraw troops from
Gaza and stop its aerial bombardment of
the strip let's bring in Tamar kmut he's
a specialist on conflict resolution and
humanitarian Aid he's also an assistant
professor of public policy at The delha
Institute of Graduate Studies good to
have you with us Tam so first of all
let's start with the Egyptian president
since I was just talking about that what
do we know about this proposal to end
the war is it getting traction so Sami
obviously it is getting traction because
we see uh I mean from who so the Hamas
leadership uh senior leadership and the
Jad islami senior ship uh senior
leadership are in Cairo they were
invited in Cairo a couple of days ago
and they're still there discussing the
initiative or this proposal and this
proposal uh it's a multiphase approach
so the first phase of it involves or
focuses on uh on on on a humanitarian
ceasefire and they're exchanging
prisoners and captives from the two
sides but there are other components to
it and this comes in phase two and three
which talks about uh it proposes a
technocrat government government running
Gaza than preparing for elections more
or less uniting the Palestinian house to
prepare for a political process post
post war Administration can that
technocrat government that understanding
between Palestinian factions be achieved
unless the US changes its position its
objection to Palestinian reconciliation
particularly between fat and Hamas so I
mean that's that's the big question uh
because we know I mean when Hamas won
the elections
it was not recognized by the US by
Israel by mainly Western countries as a
legit Palestinian party and then it was
sanctioned and isolated and then there
has been like several attempts to
reconcile fat and Hamas the last of
which was in Algeria and before there
was in Cairo and even Qatar hosted round
of internal Palestinian internal
reconcilation but they were all they all
failed mainly because of the American V2
because fat was always threatened that
if it it reconciles with Hamas it will
be also sanctions as well so if the
Americans if this if this reconciliation
um for for it to has any chance of
success the Americans have to remove
this V so what does that mean
effectively this talk about Hamas
entering the PLO cannot happen until the
withdrawal as you put it of the US veto
yes of course I mean uh it's it's Hamas
is a mainstream political party does
that mean ultimately stuck then in this
unless scenario where if the the
Palestinians can't reconcile there's not
going to be a post Palestinian post-war
government right that's
reconciled so what there just
continuation of chaos so the picture is
very complicated because the Israelis
what they want is they want to Topp down
Hamas they don't to see they want they
don't want to see any governing rule for
Hamas in Gaza but realistically that's
not possible because Hamas is there it
cannot be bypassed at the same time for
any Recon ilation efforts and for any
reconstruction and political process to
be reinitiated you need Hamas you have
to engage with Hamas it's there it's the
elephant in the room so the Americans
have to realize this they have to
recognize this and for anything to
succeed on this front if their veto is
still there I mean the success so the
suffering would then continue and if if
we you know unless that happens if we
take a step back for a second Tam and
look then at the situation the global
situation that we have celebrations in
the West on Christmas Day occupation
Siege bodies piling up
starvation as others you know sit down
for their Christmas meal we've got
starvation further east in Gaza an
embodiment of the complete disconnect
that's going on in the world right now s
sadly true Sammy I mean Humanity has
failed Palestinians I mean nowadays
especially in this time of the year I
mean uh you see even in beim in in Old
Palestinian cities uh instead of like
you know the Christmas tree the festive
moods the displays of baby Jesus and
ravels uh you know the big problem is
the the theological justification of
this word I mean the phrases even we
been hearing from Netanyahu like you
using the sons of Lights versus sons of
of Darkness I I mean forget what AMC did
you quoting the first book of Samuel
chap 15 in the Bible and and this
this ignores the fact that you know
Muslims Christians Jews they're an
authentic indigenous part of this region
and they have coexisted peaceful for a
long time the problem is with Zionism
with Colonial settler ideologies with
occupation that's the problem so we are
at a at a very dark station in in in
history when it comes to to the behavior
of humanity the International Community
uh towards Palestinians per se and and
and and towards ending any Prospect to
end occupation thank you very much Tamar
kmo for coming
in